my years in Yosemite were the
best years of my life
that was where I was training
and i was learning the skills of
big wall climbing and I wanted
to find walls and that people
hadn't done before and I wanted
to pioneer my own rounds but you
know a conclusion that i did
come to from going on all these
expeditions climbing is kind of
a selfish pursuits
so I start thinking what can I
do with this with the skills
that I've built up as a climber
and I come across this issue of
national geographic buoys
Venezuelans islands in time may
I don't know how i found it i
opened it up guess what
there's giant rock towers in the
Amazon jungle
they're called to please I
thought wow how do you get up
one of those cliffs that looks
awesome
the article of course is not
about that it's about science
it's about the summit's of these
mountains being the poem of like
all these endemic species and
they've evolved separately we're
talking plants and animals from
their cousins that live down in
the jungle below everything up
there is unique one of these
unique creatures is called
pebble toad
there's a couple things about
them that are really unique if
you look at the the hind feet
they are adapted for climbing in
a way that's totally unique
I think there's eight species of
pebble toads five of them have
been found on the top of two
police and I'm thinking who
ok i'm starting to get the
beginning of an idea here
the guy who's trying to figure
this all out why do these
creatures happened to exist on
the summit of these two please
dr. Bruce means this guy has
been on 32 expeditions to the
two police
he's a biologist he's found tons
of new species
so Bruce and I come up with this
plan and this plan is
custom-made for National
Geographic we say so
have your people been up on the
summit of this mountain and
they're looking at it and
they're like oh yeah
our guys have been up there they
go up a helicopter they found a
lot of cool stuff like okay
that's cool have you guys been
down in the bottom in the jungle
they're like oh yeah totally her
guys have been all over the
jungle
they found a lot of stuff down
there like oh that's cool have
you guys been here in the middle
of the veg patch on the actual
wall and they're all like
they're like actually no I don't
think our guys have been on the
wall and that's when Bruce like
slams his fist down on the table
and says I guarantee that i will
find new species on the to Polly
walls
the only problem is now we've
told them that we're going to go
up where the veges on the wall
and as a climber that's really
not the way you want to go you
want to avoid the veg
so we've got ourselves a little
bit of a problem
like most of these adventures
the best part of it is
connecting with the local people
so here and there in the Amazon
isn't Amerindians and we need
these guys to help us to get
into the base of the tower
there's no possible way that we
we could have found it
we did not anticipate that the
hardest part of this trip was
going to be just getting to the
base of the tower
you can see this Ridge right
here this doesn't look that bad
this looks like a ridge like in
the shadow is right you hike up
this thing that little section
there which is half a mile took
us five days and what you can't
see is that it's actually really
steep under there and it's
jungle mountaineering and we
would scrape our way up these
little walls and then we build
these little ladders would put
ropes down and we put these
rooms on so that we could all
move up with our gear but
eventually we came to this spot
that we called the slime wall
bona fide slime
so like at this point we've
climbed all kinds of different
stuff like all different kinds
of rock
I say even climbed grass in
poland in the Tatras which is
another great story but I'd
never climb slime
the closest that i could I came
was trying to climb the greased
pole at the fryeburg fair in
Maine but slime is really really
really hard to climb
we were relying on going up
these vines
we think the highest we got up
the wall was like 10 feet and
then defines would break off
we'd slide down the wall and
then hit this little ledge and
you've had to hit the ledge
because there's a huge drop-off
right to decide the amerindian
guys thought that this was
probably the greatest show that
they had ever seen in their life
and eventually we're like hey
you know what
guess what dude you're giving
this pitch ago Edward Edward was
like he didn't speak English but
he kind of got the message he
was all like what I'm leaving it
there like added
here's the harness and we suited
him up
well guess what the Amerindians
like these guys must have gecko
blood or something because this
guy got on the sly mall and he
just went right up it
the problem was that we hadn't
really looked at carefully it
like the upper section and we
just thought get past the slime
part it will get easier
well it didn't get easier it
went from slime to dirt which
was good but it went from 80
degrees to like 90
so he went for like another 20
feet up the dirt by putting his
hands in all the way up to his
shoulders and he told it was
like grabbing onto roots and
kicking his feet in like he was
like ice climbing this
eventually brought him to a roof
of vegetation and we looked up
and we saw him up there were
like oh man this is bad you know
and we're like he'll figure it
out but he has to because he
can't down climate so he's got
his arms and all the way like
this and he starts going like
this and he starts head-butting
the wall and we're all looking
at each other like this bad
like
his head but in the wall and
then I wanted the head but he
bit on anyone any tore off a
little patch of moss
they're like wow now he's biting
the cliff I've never seen that
never seen anyone do that
well he starts biting off chunks
and we quickly realized like
he's chewing a hole through the
wall and he chewed the hole big
enough to like get his head
started and then he started
burrowing into it and he he
turned into Mole Man and took a
long time over the course of
like about an hour and a half
he borrowed his way all the way
into the dirt
the last thing I saw was his
legs sticking out in the back
and he was like this and he was
shaken to try to get himself
deeper and I remember one of his
shoes fly off and spin through
the mist and disappear off the
ledge and for the rest of the
trip he had one shoe but he did
it and he borrowed all the way
through and he got out onto the
ledge and we couldn't see him at
this point but he let loose with
this blood-curdling scream that
I think was like half triumph in
half like terror and the story
was they heard it in the village
40 miles away but he was
definitely stoked and he allowed
the expedition to proceed
we made a little camp up here on
this reg and we have this one
last little little hill to get
to the base so I get up early in
the morning before everybody
else and honestly I was feeling
bad
I'm like I'm making the
amerindian guys do the hardest
stuff like I gotta redeem myself
now it's matted dead wood laying
over the clef
it's really steep but instead of
being slime it's rotten wood and
I'm trying to climb it it's all
just breaking off and but
there's it's like this layer and
a couple of times the whole
thing collapses and I fall
through into the inside and I
look up and I can see that
there's like a space on the
on the inside it's almost like
kind of like a chimney that you
could slither up and I looked up
in there and I thought what
would Edward do
I'm like I'm like he would go in
for sure
I'm like that's what I'm doing
I'm going more man
so I put my hood up I cinched
everything up and i started
squirming my way up through here
and i was in there for hours and
straight up there are tarantulas
in there
scorpions it was wicked-hot it
was probably the nastiest thing
I've ever done in my life
finally I hit a wall at the end
I broke all the wood and veg out
o above me and I popped out and
the amerindian guys are sitting
there
yeah
there there looking at me and
they're like Marco where the
hell have you been
I was like I was like down under
the veg
I was doing like what you did
yesterday they were like you
idiot
like we found this trail around
the side like we've been here
for hours waiting for you
well don't forget we have told
National Geographic that we're
going to climb up onto the veg
patch and we're going to try to
find some some new species but
the veg isn't really where you
want to be on these cliffs the
badges is a nightmare actually
we kind of found this route
where we hit a little veg patch
part way we dug in
we we actually got some samples
every time you would stick your
hand into the wall and you would
pull it out
you would have either a
tarantula or a scorpion in your
hand
we had slightly more scorpion so
we ended up calling our climb
the Scorpion wall
we had an awesome adventure up
on this mountain
we're on the mountain in the
background there and we were
flying away in a helicopter
we fly over this other two pooey
Bruce doesn't even know about it
he's been on 32 expeditions here
and as we go over the top we see
this giant sinkhole and there's
a forest down inside and so
Bruce looks at that Inn in he he
thinks you know what that is
exactly the kind of place where
I need to go because it's an
environment that's right in
between the two pooey summits
and the jungle down below and I
think like this missing link
type of frog that i'm looking
for is going to be down in that
hole and my only job is to get
Bruce down in the hole and then
to get Bruce back out of the
hole so we get Bruce down into
the hole and we leave them down
in there
it's it's really the kind of wet
and nasty down in there so we
have this nice dry camp up on
the top so we go back up to our
camp and we hang out and we
drink scotch and we look down in
and we see Bruce down in there
like the frogs he's basically
nocturnal and we hear him
rooting around
and he's got to find this thing
but he's having a hard time
finding it and it's like day
after day and here's a little
video clip that that tells the
story pretty good about what
happened to bros down in the
hole and they're on a little
leaf SAT one of these priceless
little babies and then I
realized
whoo they do what the lower
elevation one does this may sit
on leads and I start looking
within 10 minutes i found
another one and then by 9:30 I
found for this is fabulous
I i do want to stay another
night I'd like to do some more
work on the collagen that my
camera with me but I know you on
and on and on the other yacht
about we're successful
yeah
after you found the Frog we had
like a little celebration down
the hall and Bruce fell over
there was a tree right there and
he actually broke the tree off
it is like super lucky because
he was going to hit the ground
like a sack of potatoes
I'm thinking okay I got to get
this guy out of the hole
so here's another little clip
showing how I got him out
I'm trying to set up basically
the beefiest rig that I've ever
set up in my life just to make
sure that that we can get Bruce
out of the hole
I pretty much tied together this
entire troll forest i think i
have 10 trees interlinked
this is one of the crazier
things that I've ever set up
i can confirm that he just moved
up about six inches so he's got
a hundred and ninety nine and a
half feet to go
well we did it and we got him
out of the hole
Bruce loves to show this picture
and if he was here he would tell
you that I tried to kill him but
I did have a back-up rope so i
had two ropes but he likes to
sort of pretend that didn't
happen but it's a it's one of
his stories so Bruce's looked at
the DNA of the purple toads and
guess what he found the
separation is only like a few
thousand years the two parties
have been isolated for more like
millions
so what does that mean it means
that the frogs have been
climbing up and down and there's
exchange going on between the
frogs that live down in the
jungle and the frogs that live
up on the top with this one
species
there's another species that
he's found that has been
separated from its cousins by
millions of years and so bruce
says to me that makes perfect
sense because those ones are
adapted for climbing
so you have both things going on
at the same time so you have the
old paradigm and you have the
new paradigm
so the guys 71 his first rappel
is a free hanging your pal into
a sinkhole on to pooey kind of a
tough place to learn how to do
this